Descartes. Meditation 2.


Section 10

From this I begin to know what I am with somewhat greater clearness and distinctness than heretofore. But, nevertheless, it still seems to me, and I cannot help believeing, that corporeal things, whose images are formed by thought [which fall under the senses], and are examined by the same, are known with much greater distinctnbess than that I know not what part of myself which is not imaginable; although, in truth, it may seem strange to say that I know and comprehend with greater distiness things whose existence appears to me doubtful, that are unknown , and do not belong to me, than others of whose reality I am persuaded, that are known to me, and appertain to my proper nature; in a word, than myself. But I see clearly what is the sate of the case. My mind is apt to wander, and will not yet submit to be restrained withing the limits o truth. Let us therefore leave the mind to itself once more, an, according to it every kind of liberty permit it to consider the objects that appear to it from without], in order that, having afterward witdrawn it from these gently andopportunely [and fixed it on the consideration of its being and the properties it finds in itself], it may then be the more easily controlled.

Section 11

Let us now accourdingly consider the objects that are commonly thought to be [the most easily, and likewise] the most distinctly known, viz., the bodies we touch an d see; not, indeed, bodies in general, for these general notions, are usually somewhat more confused, but one body in particular. Take, for example, this piece of wax; it it quite fresh, having been but recently taken from the beehive; it has not yet lost the sweetness of the honey it contained; it still retains somewhatof the odor of the flowers from which it was gathered; its color, figure, size, are apparent (to the sight); it is hard, cold, easily handled; and sounds when struck upon with the finder. In fine, all that contributes to make a body as distinctly known as possible, is found in the one before us. But, while I am speaking, let it be placed near the fire--what remained of the taste exhales, the smell evaporates, the colour changes, its figure is destroyed, its size increases, it becomes liquit, it grows hot, it can heardly be handled, and, although struck upon, it emits no sounds. Does the same wax still remain after this change? It must be admitted that it does remain; no one doubts it, or judges otherwise. What, then, was it I knew with so much distincness in the piece of wax? Assuredly, it could be nothing of all that I observed by means of the senses, since all the things that fell under taste, smell, sight, touch, and hearing are changed, and yet the same wax remains.