Received: 2 September 2016

| Accepted: 14 March 2017

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12572

SHORT REPORT

Iconicity in the speech of children and adults
Lynn K. Perry1 | Marcus Perlman2 | Bodo Winter3 | Dominic W. Massaro4 |
Gary Lupyan5
1
Department of Psychology, University of
Miami, Coral Gables, Florida, USA

Abstract

2

Iconicity – the correspondence between form and meaning – may help young children

Language and Cognition Group, Max Planck
Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands
3

Department of English Language and
Literature, University of Birmingham, UK
4

Department of Psychology, University of
California Santa Cruz, USA
5

Department of Psychology, University of
Wisconsin Madison, USA
Correspondence
Lynn K. Perry, 5665 Ponce De Leon Blvd.,
Department of Psychology, University of
Miami, Coral Gables, FL 33124, USA.
Email: lkperry@miami.edu

learn to use new words. Early-­learned words are higher in iconicity than later learned
words. However, it remains unclear what role iconicity may play in actual language
use. Here, we ask whether iconicity relates not just to the age at which words are acquired, but also to how frequently children and adults use the words in their speech. If
iconicity serves to bootstrap word learning, then we would expect that children should
say highly iconic words more frequently than less iconic words, especially early in development. We would also expect adults to use iconic words more often when speaking to children than to other adults. We examined the relationship between frequency
and iconicity for approximately 2000 English words. Replicating previous findings, we
found that more iconic words are learned earlier. Moreover, we found that more iconic
words tend to be used more by younger children, and adults use more iconic words
when speaking to children than to other adults. Together, our results show that young
children not only learn words rated high in iconicity earlier than words low in iconicity,
but they also produce these words more frequently in conversation – a pattern that is
reciprocated by adults when speaking with children. Thus, the earliest conversations
of children are relatively higher in iconicity, suggesting that this iconicity scaffolds the
production and comprehension of spoken language during early development.

RESEARCH HIGHLIGHTS

numerous possibilities, such as being asked to get the ‘cup’ in the con-

• We investigated the frequency and iconicity, or sound–meaning

in some contexts, children must learn to generalize to new contexts

text of a cluttered kitchen. Even after understanding a word’s meaning

correspondence, of ~2000 words in children’s and adults’ speech.

and to produce the word on their own. And yet by the time the aver-

• Early parent–child conversations are characterized by the frequent

age child is 2.5 years old, she produces approximately 700 words and
many more word combinations (Fenson et al., 1994) – all before she

use of highly iconic words.
• Adult conversations with other adults are characterized by the fre-

can even tie her own shoes. How do children solve such a difficult
problem, and not only understand, but also produce, all these hun-

quent use of more arbitrary (less iconic) words.
• Children’s speech becomes less iconic (and more adult-like) over

dreds of words? One way children might gain an advantage is by making use of the iconicity of certain words, or the resemblance between

development.

the sound of a word and its meaning (e.g., the word ‘slurp’ sounds
like the sound made when performing that action). In this paper, we

1 | INTRODUCTION

examine the role of iconicity in language use, asking whether iconicity relates to the frequency of words in children’s and adults’ speech.

Word learning should be incredibly difficult. Children must often

A growing number of studies demonstrate that adults and espe-

interpret the meaning of a new word in chaotic environments with

cially children can use iconicity as an aid to learn and generalize the

Developmental Science. 2017;e12572.
https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12572

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/desc 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

|

1 of 8

2 of 8

|

PERRY et al.

meanings of new words. For example, Lupyan and Casasanto (2015)

Here, we examine the iconicity and frequency of words in children’s

found that adult participants were better at learning to categorize

and adults’ speech. If, as we propose, iconicity supports word learning

two species of aliens with pointed or rounded heads when they were

and production, then words high in iconicity ought to be more frequent

labeled with iconic names corresponding with their visual feature

in young children’s speech than words low in iconicity. One reason

(‘crelch’ and ‘foove’, respectively). Other studies have shown that chil-

early-­acquired words might be more iconic than later-­acquired words

dren can use iconicity to learn individual word–referent associations

is that caregivers may adjust their language when speaking to children

(Asano et al., 2015; Imai, Kita, Nagumo, & Okada, 2008; Kantartzis,

to facilitate comprehension. When speaking to adults, however, there

Imai, & Kita, 2011; Maurer, Pathman, & Mondloch, 2006). For example,

would not be the same adjustment requirements. We therefore also

when English-­learning preschoolers were taught novel verbs following

expect highly iconic words to be more frequent in adults’ speech to

the iconic structure of Japanese mimetics (a special class of words that

children than in their speech to other adults. Alternatively, it may turn

tend to be high in iconicity, e.g. Imai & Kita, 2014), they were more

out that there is no relationship between iconicity and frequency of

accurate at generalizing the correct action to a novel agent than pre-

words in children’s and adults’ speech. If so, it would suggest that ico-

schoolers taught with non-­iconic verbs (Kantartzis et al., 2011). Even

nicity, while perhaps helpful in initial acquisition, does not continue to

children as young as 14 months of age have shown a learning advan-

play an active role in early communication and language use.

tage for iconic words (Imai et al., 2015).

Here we collected iconicity ratings for approximately 2000 English

One way iconicity can help children learn new words is by con-

words, and then compared these ratings to the frequency of the words

straining potential meanings of a word (Imai & Kita, 2014; Perniss &

in children’s speech, adults’ child-­directed speech, and adults’ adult-­

Vigliocco, 2014). Children’s sensitivity to the relationship between a

directed speech. By examining differences in iconicity in these differ-

word’s form and meaning may help them to interpret the meaning of a

ent registers of speech, we shed light on the role of iconicity in word

new word in ambiguous situations. The better a child is at identifying a

usage, and how it might scaffold the acquisition of spoken language

word’s meaning, the more accurately they will then be able to general-

during development.

ize that word to new instances and contexts, subsequently increasing
their productions of the word in new contexts.
If iconicity facilitates early word learning, then the words of a language that are learned earliest by children should be most iconic. In
addition to the high prevalence of onomatopoeia (e.g., ‘moo’, ‘quack’)

2 | METHODS
2.1 | Participants

in children’s early vocabulary (e.g., Laing, 2014), recent analyses of

We recruited 1593 native English speakers residing in the United

English and Spanish (Perry, Perlman, & Lupyan, 2015) and British

States via Amazon Mechanical Turk.

Sign Language (Thompson, Vinson, Woll, & Vigliocco, 2012) show
that the earliest-­learned words tend to be the most iconic. Perry
and colleagues obtained native-­speaker iconicity ratings for English

2.2 | Stimuli

vocabulary (Fenson et al., 1994) and Spanish vocabulary (Jackson-­

We collected iconicity ratings for 2117 English words, of which 592

Maldonado et al., 2003) from the respective MacArthur-­Bates

were drawn from the MacArthur-­Bates Developmental Inventory of

Communicative Developmental Inventory (MCDI) checklists, and ex-

Words and Sentences (MCDI), a normed list of the early productive

amined whether these ratings predicted the proportion of children

vocabulary of 16–30-­month-­old toddlers learning American English

who produced each word at age 30 months. In both languages, they

(Fenson et al., 1994). For these words, we used ratings previously col-

found that early-­learned words, such as ‘bubbles’ and ‘splash’, tend to

lected by Perry et al. (2015). The 1525 new words were selected to

be rated higher in iconicity than later-­acquired words, such as ‘per-

maximize coverage with relevant psycholinguistic datasets of age of

son’ and ‘bench’. The relationship between iconicity and age of acqui-

acquisition and concreteness norms.1 Compound and homonymous

sition held after accounting for other factors known to relate to age

words (e.g., tear) were excluded. We created four randomized orders

of acquisition, such as word length, word frequency, and concrete-

of the complete list and broke each into sub-­lists of 25–26 randomly

ness. The relationship between iconicity and age of acquisition also

selected words.

remained highly significant after removing all onomatopoetic words
from the analyses.

Age of acquisition (AoA) was approximated using adult ratings from
Kuperman, Stadthagen-­Gonzalez and Brysbaert (2012) comprising the

These results show that young children tend to learn words rated

most comprehensive English AoA norms. Adults’ subjective AoA ratings

higher in iconicity earlier than words rated lower in iconicity. However,

have been shown to correlate highly with objective measures of chil-

it remains unclear what role iconicity plays in actual language use.

dren’s vocabulary development (Gilhooly & Gilhooly, 1980; Morrison,

Does iconicity influence how often children or adults say different

Chappell, & Ellis, 1997; Pind, Jónsdóttir, Gissurardóttir, & Jónsson,

words? Theoretically, once a word is learned, it could be used equally

2000). Given that Perry et al. (2015) previously found iconicity-­related

often as other already-­learned words. (Once a child learns their 100th

differences in a more objective measure of AoA data for a smaller num-

word they may use it as readily as their 1st.) However, it is possible

ber of words, our analysis of AoA constitutes an independent replica-

that even after a child has learned to produce a word, its usage contin-

tion with an expanded dataset. As a measure of word concreteness,

ues to be driven by the word’s iconicity.

we used adult ratings from Brysbaert, Warriner, and Kuperman (2014).

| 3 of 8

PERRY et al.

2.3 | Procedure

much smaller vocabulary lists (i.e., Perry et al., 2015). Second, we move
beyond previous work, examining whether words high in iconicity are

Iconicity was quantified following the procedure of Perry et al. (2015).

more frequent in children’s speech than words low in iconicity and

As in the previous study, the instructions defined iconicity and pro-

whether adults’ speech to children is more iconic than their speech

vided participants with examples of what an iconic, arbitrary, and

to other adults.

‘opposite’ meaning for a word might be (see below). The specific ex-

Because AoA is known to be influenced by a number of factors,

amples for opposite and arbitrary were drawn from Hockett (1960)

we used multiple regression to control for a word’s overall frequency

and Pinker and Bloom’s (1990) respective arguments regarding the

(based on the spoken section of the American Nation Corpus), con-

arbitrariness of language.

creteness, and number of morphemes. We also examined the rela-

Some English words sound like what they mean. For example, SLURP

tionship between iconicity and ‘systematicity’ for these words, based

sounds like the noise made when you perform this kind of drinking ac-

on data from Monaghan, Shillcock, Christiansen, and Kirby (2014).

tion. An example that does not relate to the sound of an action is TEENY,

‘Systematicity’ quantifies the statistical regularity of language-­specific

which sounds like something very small (compared to HUGE which

sound–meaning pairings (e.g., knowing ‘glitter’ and ‘glisten’ could fa-

sounds big). These words are iconic. You might be able to guess these

cilitate learning of ‘glow’). This measure was shown to predict AoA

words’ meanings even if you did not know English. Words can also sound

(Monaghan et al., 2014), but Perry and colleagues (2015) found that

like the opposite of what they mean. For example, MICROORGANISM

iconicity predicts AoA above and beyond systematicity for the first

is a large word that means something very small. And WHALE is a small

words children learn. We therefore sought to replicate this finding for

word that means something very large. And finally, many words are not

our expanded set of words. Because systematicity measures were only

iconic or opposite at all. For example there is nothing canine or feline

available for 965 of our 2117 words (Monaghan et al., 2014), we con-

sounding about the words DOG or CAT. These words are arbitrary. If you

ducted a second analysis of AoA on the subset of words for which this

did not know English, you would not be able to guess the meanings of

measure is available.

these words.

We next examined the relationship between iconicity and word

Participants then rated one word at a time, on a scale ranging from

frequency in children and adults’ speech. For children’s frequency, we

−5 (opposite) to 5 (iconic). The 0 point corresponded to words that

used data from CHILDES, which has complete production frequen-

are arbitrary. See Figure 1. Participants were asked to say each word

cies for each 3-­month period between 12 and 69 months.3 Word-­level

aloud before making their judgment. Each participant was randomly

production frequencies were analyzed. Because this analysis included

assigned to one of the sub-­lists and rated its 25–26 words (limited to

multiple data points per word (i.e., frequency of a given word for

prevent fatigue), resulting in at least 10 ratings per word.

12–14-­month-­olds, for 15–17-­month-­olds, etc.), we used linear mixed
effects models. Word was fitted as a random intercept with a random

2.4 | Analysis

slope for the effect of age (quantifying by-­word variation in age effects). Models were fitted with maximum likelihood, and p-­values were

We conducted all analyses using R version 3.3.1. (R Core Team, 2014).

estimated using likelihood ratio tests (analysis of deviance). Adults’

The lme4 package version 1.1.12 was used for mixed model analysis

child-­directed production frequency4 (based on CHILDES data col-

(Bates, Maechler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015), and several other packages

lapsed across child age) and adults’ adult-­directed frequency (based

were used for processing the data.2 All data and analyses are publicly

on the American National Corpus) were each analyzed using multi-

accessible via the following link: http://www.github.com/bodowinter/

ple regression (item-­level analysis). In all analyses, we control for AoA,

iconicity_acquisition. Throughout our analyses, we use linear models

concreteness, number of morphemes, and frequency in other speech

or linear mixed effects models. In all cases, visual inspection of plots

types (e.g., analysis of frequency in children’s speech controls for fre-

of residuals against fitted values and Q-­Q plots revealed no obvious

quency in adults’ child-­directed and adult-­directed speech).

deviations from normality and homoscedasticity. Variance inflation
factors were estimated using the package car version 2.0.26, (Fox &
Weisberg, 2011), and these revealed no problems with (multi-­)collinearity. When fitting interactions, variables were centered (Schielzeth,
2010).

3 | RESULTS
3.1 | Age of acquisition

Our analysis is separated into two parts: First, we examined

The relationship between iconicity and AoA is shown in Figure 2.

whether words high in iconicity are acquired earlier than words low

Words rated higher in iconicity tend to be acquired earlier (see

in iconicity – testing whether we replicate earlier findings that used

Table 1, M1 for regression results). As can be seen in Table 1, M2, the

FIGURE 1
ratings task

A sample trial of the iconicity

4 of 8

|

PERRY et al.

iconicity such that as children develop, words low in iconicity become
more frequent than words high in iconicity. As shown in Figure 3a,
younger children produce more iconic words more frequently than
less iconic words, while older children produce more iconic words less
frequently than less iconic words. The interaction between age and
iconicity held after removing onomatopoetic words from the analyses
(Table 2, M6). In all these analyses, we controlled for the overall number of words produced for a certain age.5
The analyses so far have focused on individual words – collapsing across speakers – to examine the relationship between iconicity
and age in the use of these words. We next examine the relationship
between iconicity and word usage over development for individual
children. To allow this longitudinal analysis, we excluded data from sevF I G U R E 2 The effect of iconicity on age of acquisition (AoA)
after controlling for overall word frequency, concreteness, and
word length. Each dot corresponds to a word. The shaded region
represents the 95% confidence region of the mean

eral children of the CHILDES dataset (MacWhinney, 2000). We only
included children over 12 months of age who produced at least 30
unique data points for at least five separate time points, resulting in
150 of the 323 children (see footnote 3). Using the iconicity ratings for
each word, we calculated an average iconicity score for all words a child

T A B L E 1 Results of each regression model used in analyses of
AoA. M1–3 show the results of using iconicity to predict AoA. M4
shows the results of using systematicity to predict AoA. For each
analysis, we controlled for the following covariates: concreteness,
number of morphemes, and the frequency of words in adult-­directed
speech

produced at each time point. These iconicity averages were computed
in a frequency-­weighted fashion: more frequent words contribute more
to the estimated degree of iconicity in a child’s vocabulary for a given
month. For example, the child ‘Betty’ produced 34 different words at
month 18, with an average iconicity score of 1.07. At month 49, she
produced 129 different words with an average iconicity score of only

Iconicity

0.64. Because the exact age-­range varied from child to child, we nor-

M1) Including all 2117 words

b=−.35, t=−9.61, p < .0001

malized age to lie in the range between 0 and 1 to facilitate analysis (all

M2) Excluding onomatopoeia and
interjections; includes 2090 words

b=−.34, t=−9.16, p < .0001

M3) Controlling for systematicity (only
including subset of 930 words for
which we have systematicity ratings;
Monaghan et al., 2014)

b=−.22, t=−4.76, p < .0001

M4) Predicting AoA from systematicity; includes 930 words

b=761.62, t=1.89, p = .059

results hold for non-­normalized time series as well). A linear mixed effects model with time as a fixed effect and subject as random intercept
(including by-­subject time random slopes) revealed a significant effect
of time. This relationship held after removing onomatopoeic words from
the analysis, although only with marginal significance (Table 2, M7). The
average iconicity fell from 0.64 for the first session with a child to an
average of 0.56 for the last session of each child. A look at the random
effects estimates (the best linear unbiased predictors) reveals that only
10 of 150 children had positive age slopes or increases in iconicity over

relationship between iconicity and AoA was statistically reliable even

time, meaning that 93% of all children in the sample decreased their

after excluding all interjections and onomatopoetic forms (such as

use of words rated high in iconicity over time. Figure 4 shows how the

‘hush’, ‘buzz’). Iconicity was also a reliable predictor of AoA after con-

relationship between frequency and iconicity changes over develop-

trolling for systematicity in the subset of data for which both measures

ment for each child by showing the random effects of the mixed effects

exist (Table 1, M3). The systematicity measure predicted AoA margin-

model, with each line representing an individual child. A generalized

ally (Table 1, M4). Together, these results replicate Perry et al.’s (2015)

additive model (Wood, 2006; for use, see Winter & Wieling, 2016) con-

findings with a larger set of words that are acquired over a longer pe-

firmed that a simple linear trend is appropriate (edf close to 1), with the

riod of development. We next examined the relationship between ico-

average iconicity of words decreasing steadily with age.

nicity ratings and frequency in children’s and adult’s speech.

3.2 | Frequency in speech
3.2.1 | Children’s speech

3.2.2 | Adults’ speech
As can be seen in Figure 3b, the relationship between iconicity and
frequency in adults’ speech depends on whether an adult is speaking
to another adult or a child. In adult-­directed speech, they tend to pro-

As shown in Figure 3a, there was a positive relationship between a

duce words rated lower in iconicity more frequently than words rated

word’s iconicity and its frequency in children’s speech such that words

higher in iconicity. This result holds after removing onomatopoeic

high in iconicity tended to be more frequent than words low in ico-

words from the analyses (Table 2, M8). Thus, conversations between

nicity (Table 2, M5). There was also an interaction between age and

adults tend to be characterized by the use of words lower in iconicity.

| 5 of 8

PERRY et al.

CHILDES Child Frequency

Log Frequency

1.25

(a)

Adult Frequency
2.5

(b)

1.00

th

n
Mo

0.75

Month

0.50

2

=1

Ch

= 69

Ad

1.5

ul

0.25

2.0

ted

rec

di
ild-

t-d

ire

1.0

ct

ed

0.00

0.5
-2.5

0.0

2.5

5.0

-2.5

0.0

2.5

5.0

Average Iconicity Rating
(z scores)
F I G U R E 3 (a) Predicted production frequency for children, showing a reversal of the relationship from month 12 to month 69. The middle
line shows the relationship between iconicity and frequency for the median age (39 months), based on a linear mixed effects model. The
analyses reported in the text model age as a continuous variable. (b) Predicted production frequency for adults in adult-­directed and child-­
directed speech. Shaded regions represent the 95% confidence of the mean based on the corresponding statistical model. All visualizations
incorporate controls for concreteness and word length. The child frequencies also incorporate controls for adult-­directed and child-­directed
frequencies. The child-­directed frequency also controls for adult-­directed frequency

T A B L E 2 Results of each regression model used in analyses of the relationship between iconicity and frequency. For each analysis, we
controlled for the following covariates: concreteness, number of morphemes, AoA, and the frequency of words in the other two speech types
from frequency of the speech type of interest
M5) Frequency in
children’s speech
(main effect of
iconicity)

M6) Frequency in
children’s speech
(interaction between
iconicity and age)

M7) Frequency-­weighted
iconicity in individual
children’s speech
(main effect of age)

M8) Frequency in
adults’ adult-­
directed speech

M9) Frequency
in adults’
child-­directed
speech

Including all words
(N=2117)

b=.03, t=4.55,
p < .0001

b=−.25, t=6.58,
p < .0001

b=−.1, t=4.72,
p < .0001

b=−.21, t=10.85,
p < .0001

b=.1, t=6.79,
p < .0001

Excluding
onomatopoeia
(N=2090)

b=.03, t=3.92,
p < .0001

b=−.02, t=5.57,
p < .0001

b=−.03, t=1.86,
p = .066

b=−.21, t=0.46,
p < .0001

b=.1, t=5.9,
p < .0001

As can be seen in Figure 3b, however, adults’ child-­directed speech

more iconic: the higher a word is rated in iconicity, the more frequently

tends to be higher in iconicity. We found a positive association be-

it tends to be spoken. We found the same pattern in the child-­directed

tween iconicity and frequency in child-­
directed speech, such that

speech of adults. In contrast, in adults’ adult-­directed speech, words

words rated higher in iconicity appear more frequently than words

lower in iconicity tended to be produced most frequently. Moreover,

rated lower in iconicity. This result held after removing onomatopoeic

we found evidence that children’s speech tends to change into this

words from the analysis (Table 2, M9). Thus, as we had initially pre-

adult pattern of speech. Over development, children are increasingly

dicted, while overall adults tend to use words low in iconicity more

likely to use less iconic (i.e., more arbitrary and opposite sounding)

frequently than those high in iconicity, when speaking to children they

words. Together with our AoA results, these findings suggest that ico-

tend to use words of higher iconicity. Together with the results from

nicity plays an important role in early language acquisition and use.

children’s own speech, this result suggests that early parent-­child con-

However, over developmental time, iconicity becomes less important

versations tend to contain many high iconicity words.

to children’s ability to comprehend and produce words.
Perry and colleagues (2015) previously found that English and

4 | DISCUSSION

Spanish vocabularies were structured such that the earliest-­learned
words were higher in iconicity than later-­learned words. These findings
mirrored a pattern that has been independently observed for British

Our primary goal was to examine how the frequency of words in the

Sign Language (Thompson et al., 2012; Vinson, Cormier, Denmark,

speech of adults and children varies depending on iconicity. We found

Schembri, & Vigliocco, 2008). Here we show that the effects of ico-

that the words used most frequently by young children tend to be

nicity can be seen not only in word learning, but also in production.

6 of 8

|

PERRY et al.

Another possibility is that over the course of learning and use,

(Frequency-weighted)

Average Iconicity

1.50

words become more iconic. Perhaps adults modulate their pronun-

1.25

ciation of words to have slightly more iconic forms, which are then

1.00

learned by children. In support of this idea, adults have been found

0.75

speech (Nygaard, Herold, & Namy, 2009). For example, when pro-

to exaggerate iconic properties of novel words in their child-­directed
ducing the novel word ‘seebow’ to mean ‘big’, adults increased the

0.50

duration and amplitude and decreased the fundamental frequency
relative to when it meant ‘small’. Adults have also been found to

0.25

modify their prosody in iconic ways outside of child-­directed com-

0.00
0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

Normalized Time

munication, such as when reading short stories out loud (Perlman,
Clark, & Johansson Falck, 2015; also see Shintel, Nusbaum, &
Okrent, 2006). These studies focused on prosodic properties, but
phonetic features like vocal quality and voicing may be altered as

F I G U R E 4 The best linear unbiased predictors (random effects
estimates) for the longitudinal change of averaged iconicity over
developmental time; each line corresponds to a single child;
predictions come from a linear mixed effects regression; only
predictions for the 66 children are displayed for which there were at
least 10 different time points (for visualization purposes only, all 150
children were included in the actual analyses)

ing ‘small’ to contain the high front vowel /i/ (Blasi, Wichmann,

Children and their parents tend to use words rated higher in iconicity

ers – and perhaps especially adults speaking with children – accentu-

well.
As a speculative example of how this process might operate to
change words, consider the case of words with meanings related to
‘small’. Across the world’s languages, there is a bias for words meanHammarström, Stadler, & Christiansen, 2016). We know that speak-

more frequently than words rated lower in iconicity, particularly in the

ate words for ‘small’ by raising their fundamental frequency (Nygaard

language of the youngest children. Our results suggest the interesting

et al., 2009; Perlman et al., 2015). It is also known that high vowels

possibility that iconicity might not only serve to facilitate word learning,

like /i/ tend to be articulated with a higher fundamental frequency

but may also facilitate early communication by increasing understand-

than lower vowels (Whalen & Levitt, 1995), and high front vowels,

ing of language in context. This idea fits with previous work comparing

in particular, are characterized by a maximum difference between

the use of onomatopoeic words and non-­linguistic sound effects by

the frequencies of the second and first formants (Ohala, 1994). Thus,

Japanese and English-­speaking parents when speaking with children.

conceivably, when speakers produce an iconic rise in pitch for ‘small’

Although Japanese speakers used more onomatopoeia overall, English

this could push their articulation of the word’s vowel to be higher and

speakers nevertheless used a small but noteworthy amount of iconic

more fronted. The raised pitch might also bias the perception of the

vocalizations – especially in the form of non-­linguistic sound effects

vowel as higher and more fronted than it really is. Over generations,

(Yoshida, 2012; and see Laing, Vihman, & Keren-­Portnoy, 2016). Our

this iconic accentuation could drive changes in the phonology of the

findings extend these results by demonstrating that the child-­directed

word – a push towards /i/ – as more iconic forms are picked up by

speech of English-­speaking parents is enhanced by iconicity even out-

children, and become fossilized in the lexicon. Interestingly, there is

side of the special cases of onomatopoeic words and sound effects.

evidence that highly iconic words resist the sound changes that other
words undergo, suggesting that once a form becomes iconic, it tends

4.1 | How do some words become more iconic?

to stay that way across long historical periods of a language (Joseph,
1987; and see Perniss, Thompson, & Vigliocco, 2010). Examining the

Our results raise an interesting question for understanding the fac-

extent to which iconic communication between parents and children

tors that shape the historical development of languages and their

might change the lexicon will be an important direction for future

lexicons. We found that the English lexicon is structured such that

research.

early-­learned and early high-­frequency words are more iconic, and we
have previously found that Spanish exhibits a similar pattern in the
order of word acquisition (Perry et al., 2015). However, word forms

4.2 | Questions of directionality

are known to change considerably over the histories of languages: So

Another important, but still unanswered question is whether iconicity

how did these patterns come to exist in the current lexicons of English

in parents’ speech has a causal role in children’s learning, or whether

and Spanish?

children’s increased use of iconicity leads parents to increase their

One possibility is that children learn iconic words earlier because

own use of iconicity. The current data support the proposal that

they are easier to learn, but the relationship between iconicity and

iconicity actively facilitates language acquisition (Imai & Kita, 2014;

AoA occurs independently of diachronic changes in the forms of

Perniss & Vigliocco, 2014). Parents might be implicitly (or explicitly)

words. That is, over historic time, words change to be more or less

aware of this learning advantage and hence use iconic words more

iconic for incidental reasons, and children are more inclined to learn

often, helping their children to more easily comprehend and produce

and use those that happen to be more iconic.

language.

| 7 of 8

PERRY et al.

However, the corpus data we analyzed contained conversational

Bates, Belfast, Bernstei, Bliss, Bloom, Brown, Clark, Cornell, Demetras,
Fletcher, Gathercole, Hall, Higginso, Howe, Kuczaj, Macboys, Macros,
Peters, Post, Sachs, Snow, Suppes, Valian, Vanhout, Vankleec, Warren, Wells.

transcriptions, but no measures of word learning and recognition.
Thus, we are not yet able to assess the consequences that individual
parents’ and children’s use of iconicity has on children’s previous or
subsequent language development. To answer such questions about
the consequences of iconicity in speech, we would need to assess

5

Iconicity was also reliably associated with word frequency when a relative
measure (frequency of word X divided by the total word count at age Y) was
used as a dependent measure rather than raw word counts.

whether parents whose child-­directed speech contains more iconicity
have children who are better at word learning. For example, they may
have faster rates of word recognition, or they may be able to learn a
new word after fewer exposures. Examining the consequences of iconicity on learning would be an important step in finding a causal link
between iconicity and acquisition.

4.3 | Conclusions
Our results show that young children learn iconic words earlier,
and they also use iconic words more frequently – a pattern that
is reciprocated by adults when speaking with children. As children
develop, they increasingly learn words with more arbitrary forms
and begin to use them increasingly often in conversation. That the
earliest conversations of children are distinctly iconic suggests that
iconicity scaffolds the production and comprehension of spoken
language during early development. More generally, these findings
support the emerging theory that many of the words of spoken
languages are iconic in functionally significant ways, spanning language development, evolution, and online processing (Clark, 2016;
Dingemanse, Blasi, Lupyan, Christiansen, & Monaghan, 2015;
Imai & Kita, 2014; Lockwood & Dingemanse, 2015; Lockwood,
Hagoort, & Dingemanse, 2016; Perlman & Cain, 2014; Perniss &
Vigliocco, 2014). Far from being a fluke of isolated segments of
the English lexicon, iconicity is systematically distributed across
the early lexicon, and it appears to play an important role in early
communication.

END NOTE S
1

Of our total list of 2117 English words normed for iconicity, 1980 words are
also normed for AoA in Kuperman et al. (2012) (~96%) and 2126 words are
also normed for concreteness in Brysbaert et al. (2014) (~98%). We selected
words from these two lists pseudo-­randomly, with the aim of having words
represented on both lists and appearing in the CHILDES corpora.

2

We used dplyr version 0.5 (Wickham & Francois, 2015)., car 2.0.26 (Fox
& Weisberg, 2011), stringr verson 1.0.0 (Wickham, 2015), reshape 1.4.1
(Wickham, 2007), readr 1.0.0 (Wickham, Hester, & Francois, 2016), mgcv
1.8.7 (Wood, 2006) and itsadug 2.2 (Van Rij, Wieling, Baayen, & Van Rijn,
2016).

3

Child frequencies were obtained from http://childfreq.sumsar.net/ (Baath,
2010). Our analysis of individual child frequencies includes data also
taken from ChildFreq from the following 26 CHILDES corpora: Bates,
Belfast, Bernstein, Bliss, Bloom70, Bloom73, Brown, Cornell, Cruttenden,
Demetras1, Evans, Fletcher, Gleason, Howe, HSLLD, Kuczaj, Manchester,
McCune, Post, Providence, Snow, Soderstrom, Suppes, Weist, Wells.
This compiled data file is publically available at http://www.github.com/
bodowinter/iconicity_acquisition.

4

Parental input frequencies are taken from http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/derived/, based on Ping Li’s processing of the following CHILDES corpora:

REFERENCES
Asano, M., Imai, M., Kita, S., Kitajo, K., Okada, H., & Thierry, G. (2015).
Sound symbolism scaffolds language development in preverbal infants.
Cortex, 63, 196–205.
Baath, R. (2010). ChildFreq: An online tool to explore the word frequencies in
child language.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Fitting linear mixed-­
effects models using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 67, 1–48.
Blasi, D.E., Wichmann, S., Hammarström, H., Stadler, P.F., & Christiansen,
M.H. (2016). Sound–meaning association biases evidenced across
thousands of languages. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA, 113, 10818–10823.
Brysbaert, M., Warriner, A.B., & Kuperman, V. (2014). Concreteness ratings for 40 thousand generally known English word lemmas. Behavior
Research Methods, 46, 904–911.
Clark, H.H. (2016). Depicting as a method of communication. Psychological
Review, 123, 324–347.
Dingemanse, M., Blasi, D.E., Lupyan, G., Christiansen, M.H., & Monaghan,
P. (2015). Arbitrariness, iconicity, and systematicity in language. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 19, 603–615.
Fenson, L., Dale, P.S., Reznick, J.S., Bates, E., Thal, D.J., & Pethick, S.J., …
& Stiles, J. (1994). Variability in early communicative development.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 59, i–185.
https://doi.org/10.2307/1166093
Fox, J., & Weisberg, S. (2011). An R companion to applied regression (2nd
edn.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Gilhooly, K.J., & Gilhooly, M.L.M. (1980). The validity of age-­of-­acquisition
ratings. British Journal of Psychology, 71, 105–110.
Hockett, C.F. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientific American, 203, 88–96.
Imai, M., & Kita, S. (2014). The sound symbolism bootstrapping hypothesis for language acquisition and language evolution. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences,
369, 20130298.
Imai, M., Kita, S., Nagumo, M., & Okada, H. (2008). Sound symbolism facilitates early verb learning. Cognition, 109, 54–65.
Imai, M., Miyazaki, M., Yeung, H.H., Hidaka, S., Kantartzis, K., Okada,
H., & Kita, S. (2015). Sound symbolism facilitates word learning in
14-­month-­olds. PLoS ONE, 10, e0116494.
Jackson-Maldonado, D., Thal, D.J., Marchman, V.A., Newton, T., Fenson, L.,
& Conboy, B. (2003). MacArthur Inventarios del Desarrollo de Habilidades
Comunicativas: User’s guide and technical manual. Baltimore, MD:
Brookes.
Joseph, B.D. (1987). On the use of iconic elements in etymological investigation: Some case studies from Greek. Diachronica, 4, 1–26.
Kantartzis, K., Imai, M., & Kita, S. (2011). Japanese sound-­symbolism facilitates word learning in English-­speaking children. Cognitive Science,
35, 575–586.
Kuperman, V., Stadthagen-Gonzalez, H., & Brysbaert, M. (2012). Age-­
of-­
acquisition ratings for 30,000 English words. Behavior Research
Methods, 44, 978–990.
Laing, C.E. (2014). A phonological analysis of onomatopoeia in early word
production. First Language, 34, 387–405.
Laing, C.E., Vihman, M., & Keren-Portnoy, T. (2016). How salient are
onomatopoeia in the early input? A prosodic analysis of infant-­
directed speech. Journal of Child Language. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0305000916000428

8 of 8

|

Lockwood, G., & Dingemanse, M. (2015). Iconicity in the lab: A review of
behavioral, developmental, and neuroimaging research into sound-­
symbolism. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1246.
Lockwood, G., Hagoort, P., & Dingemanse, M. (2016). How iconicity helps
people learn new words: Neural correlates and individual differences in
sound-­symbolic bootstrapping. Collabra, 2, 7.
Lupyan, G., & Casasanto, D. (2015). Meaningless words promote meaningful categorization. Language and Cognition, 7, 167–193.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for analyzing talk (3rd
edn.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Maurer, D., Pathman, T., & Mondloch, C.J. (2006). The shape of boubas:
Sound–shape correspondences in toddlers and adults. Developmental
Science, 9, 316–322.
Monaghan, P., Shillcock, R.C., Christiansen, M.H., & Kirby, S. (2014). How
arbitrary is English?. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London Series B, Biological Sciences, 369, 20130299.
Morrison, C.M., Chappell, T.D., & Ellis, A.W. (1997). Age of acquisition
norms for a large set of object names and their relation to adult estimates and other variables. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology
Section A, 50, 528–559.
Nygaard, L.C., Herold, D.S., & Namy, L.L. (2009). The semantics of prosody:
Acoustic and perceptual evidence of prosodic correlates to word meaning. Cognitive Science, 33, 127–146.
Ohala, J.J. (1994). The frequency code underlies the sound-symbolic use of
voice pitch. In J. Hinton, J. Nichols, & J.J. Ohala (Eds.), Sound symbolism
(pp. 325–347). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Perlman, M., & Cain, A.A. (2014). Iconicity in vocalization, comparisons with
gesture, and implications for theories on the evolution of language.
Gesture, 14, 320–350.
Perlman, M., Clark, N., & Johansson Falck, M. (2015). Iconic prosody in
story reading. Cognitive Science, 39, 1348–1368.
Perniss, P., Thompson, R., & Vigliocco, G. (2010). Iconicity as a general property of language: Evidence from spoken and signed languages. Frontiers
in Psychology, 1, 227.
Perniss, P., & Vigliocco, G. (2014). The bridge of iconicity: From a world of
experience to the experience of language. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 369, 20130300.
Perry, L.K., Perlman, M., & Lupyan, G. (2015). Iconicity in English and
Spanish and its relation to lexical category and age of acquisition. PLoS
ONE, 10, e0137147.
Pind, J., Jónsdóttir, H., Gissurardóttir, H., & Jónsson, F. (2000). Icelandic
norms for the Snodgrass and Vanderwart (1980) pictures: Name and
image agreement, familiarity, and age of acquisition. Scandinavian
Journal of Psychology, 41, 41–48.

PERRY et al.

Pinker, S., & Bloom, P. (1990). Natural language and natural selection.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 13, 707–727.
R Core Team (2014). R: A language and environment for statistical computing.
Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Retrieved from http://
www.R-project.org/
Schielzeth, H. (2010). Simple means to improve the interpretability of regression coefficients. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 1, 103–113.
Shintel, H., Nusbaum, H.C., & Okrent, A. (2006). Analog acoustic expression in speech communication. Journal of Memory and Language, 55,
167–177.
Thompson, R.L., Vinson, D.P., Woll, B., & Vigliocco, G. (2012). The road
to language learning is iconic: Evidence from British Sign Language.
Psychological Science, 23, 1443–1448.
Van Rij, J., Wieling, M., Baayen, R.H., & Van Rijn, H. (2016). itsadug:
Interpreting time series and autocorrelated data using GAMMs
(Version 2.2).
Vinson, D.P., Cormier, K., Denmark, T., Schembri, A., & Vigliocco, G. (2008).
The British Sign Language (BSL) norms for age of acquisition, familiarity, and iconicity. Behavior Research Methods, 40, 1079–1087.
Whalen, D.H., & Levitt, A.G. (1995). The universality of intrinsic F0 of vowels. Journal of Phonetics, 23, 349–366.
Wickham, H. (2007). Reshaping data with the reshape package. Journal of
Statistical Software, 21, 1–20.
Wickham, H. (2015). stringr: Simple, consistent wrappers for common
string operations (Version 1.0.0).
Wickham, H., & Francois, R. (2015). dplyr: A grammar of data manipulation
(Version 0.5).
Wickham, H., Hester, J., & Francois, R. (2016). readr: Read tabular data
(Version 1.0.0).
Winter, B., & Wieling, M. (2016). How to analyze linguistic change using
mixed models, Growth Curve Analysis and Generalized Additive
Modeling. Journal of Language Evolution, 1, 7–18.
Wood, S.N. (2006). Generalized Additive Models: An introduction with R. Boca
Raton, FL: Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Yoshida, H. (2012). A cross-­linguistic study of sound symbolism in children’s
verb learning. Journal of Cognition and Development, 13, 232–265.

How to cite this article:  Perry LK, Perlman M, Winter B,
Massaro DW, Lupyan G. Iconicity in the speech of children and
adults. Dev Sci. 2017;00:e12572. https://doi.org/10.1111/
desc.12572

